The Moai of Easter Island

When European explorers first visited the Pacific island of Rapa Nui in 1772, they encountered a landscape dotted with massive monolithic statues called moai, averaging approximately seven meters in height and weighing as much as 90 tons.  The question of who the sculptors of the monumental objects were immediately surfaced, and debates over their identity proceeded for more than two centuries. It was suggested that they might have been created by pre-Incan people who sailed to the island from Peru, or even that they were made by extraterrestrials who had been stranded on Earth. These notions were ruled out in the twentieth century, when collaboration between archaeologists, linguists, and biologists definitely proved that the moai were the work of the Polynesians. But why and how did they create such elaborate statues?

Because the moai have human-like faces that are very prominent and were placed overlooking the community, most scholars believe that they were representative of social power. This interpretation is consistent with what is known about Polynesian society at that time, which was usually sharply stratified: social standing was determined by genealogies that traced their origins to creator gods. In line with this view, the mainstream argument is that the moai depicted chiefs or ancestral heads of lineages, and thus they may have served some function that bridged the gap between the human and supernatural realm. The genealogical significance of the statues has been hypothetically supported by a modern archaeological excavation. While digging out the body and base of two statues, which had become covered due to years of surface decomposition and erosion, archaeologists discovered crescent-shaped markings at the statues' bases, and they believed these marks to be representative of a "family signature." They also discovered human bones, suggesting that the statues also functioned as a ceremonial burial place for individuals within the lineage that the statue was allegedly associated with.

That the moai bore some considerable significance can be inferred by the tremendous exertion it took to produce and transport them. The Polynesian laborers of Rapa Nui carved most of the moai from hardened volcanic ash, or tuff, and although tuff is relatively easy to shape compared to very hard, dense rock, it is nonetheless estimated that a single large statue could have required 30 laborers and an entire year to complete. Approximately 95 percent of all moai were carved out of tuff, which came from a single quarry in the side of Rano Raraku, a prominent volcanic crater. There sculptors chiseled away to extract rock for their scuptures over the course of five centuries before the practice begin to wane in the late seventeenth century. By 1774, moai production has ceased and the quarry has been abandoned. This is evidenced by the graveyard of hundreds of moai in and around the crater. Many of the moai at the quarry were never completed, although most of them are well preserved and show much of the diversity that sculptors developed over the years, so today the location is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

Perhaps the greatest enigma surrounding the moai is a logistic one: how did the people of Rapa Nui raise such large moniliths and transport them significant distances from the quarry? Oral traditions propose supernatural forces, such as the story of a woman who served as a cook to moai sculptors. She is said to have moved the moai around at will using her mana, or spiritual energy. In another similar account, the moai were ordered to walk by mythical kings or priests. However, modern theories have focused on more like explanations. Using such notions as pragmatic inspiration, a Czechoslovakian resercher named Pavel constructed a moai replica that his crew moved by rocking it from side to side as if the statue was "walking." Subsequent reserch indicated that this method theoretically could be used to cover more than 100 meters per day, but not without damage to the base of the statue. Most other theories involve the use of logs as a form of sled on which to drag the moai across the surface. Such a method was proven plausible in experiments conducted by a team led by the archaeologist Jo Anne Van Tilburg. First, the team removed the bark from logs, connected the logs together, and slid a statue across them by pulling it with ropes. Next, they performed a similar experiment but this time added pounded banana stump fiber mixed with water, a traditional Polynesian lubricating substance. In the latter experiment, they were able to pull the statue farther and with greater ease.
