Water on Mars

Since the dawn of humankind, there is no doubt that countless thinkers have ponded the question of life in the universe. Yet humans have never been able to corroborate that life exists, or ever existed, outside Earth. According to the standard theory of how life began on Earth, the earliest and most primitive forms of life emerged in primordial bodies of water. Thus, any search for life elsewhere in the solar system, or in the universe for that matter, must commence with search for water, and such has been the case with regard to Mars.

The possibility of life on Mars has roots that begin long before the development of spacecraft capable of traveling outside the atmosphere of Earth. By the late 1700s, advancements in telescope technology permitted astronomers to determine that Mars had polar ice caps that tended to grow and shrink alternately in summer and winter, evidence which they interpreted as proof of water on the surface. These factors, in combination with the understanding that Mars had a similar day length and axial tilt to those of Earth, led astronomer William Herschel to conclude that Mars was most likely inhabited. And this was not an isolated opinion, as others would propose that the planet had the capability to support living organisms. More than a century later, American entrepreneur Percival Lowell noticed long, straight lines on the surface of Mars, and he argued that they were canals constructed by a race of Martians who had engineered a method for transporting water from the poles to other areas on the planet. He also postulated that the temperature on Mars was comparable to a summer day in southern England. His observations were popoularized in his 1906 book Mars and its Canals, but scientists never took them seriously, and the straight lines were subsequently proven to be optical illusions rather than actual features of the Martian surface. Moreover, the following year in a direct response entitled Is Mars Inhabitable?, English naturalist A.R Wallace reasoned that given the distance of Mars from the Sun, temperatures on Mars would remain far below freezing 100 percent of the time, making liquid water impossible and the planet "absolutely uninhabitable."

In the context of contemporary science, the majority of evidence of the historical presence of water on the surface of Mars is so compelling that it is virtually certain that water was part of the process of shaping what astronomers observe today. Mars is featured by diverse topographical features that indicative of erosion by water in the past. Most notably, there are networks of hundreds of kilometers of channels and valleys that appear to have been cut out by rivers or floodwaters, and there were made apparent by NASA's Mars Global Surveyor (MGS), which operated for nearly a decade after arriving at and orbiting Mars in 1997. The spacecraft sent back high-resolution photographs of these channels as well as gullies in canyon walls and piles of debris that appear to have been pushed across the surface by substantial water flows. In the case of the channel system known as Marte Vallies, hypothesize that the volume of water once passing through it could have reached 100 times that of the Mississippi River, suggesting that in the distant past the atmosphere of Mars was capable of producing intense deluges. Likewise, Likewise, there is also mineralogical data suggesting the past existence of rivers and lakes for long periods. For example, the discovery of substantial deposits of hematite on Mars indicates that water was present for millions of years because hematite forms over geological time frames from evaporation of circulating fluids that are rich in iron.

Additionally, the question of whether water on Mars currently exists has been conclusively answered by data collected during missions to Mars. Most recently, the camera of NASA's Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) revealed cross-section imagery of eight rocky slopes that protrude vertically above the surrounding ground, and researchers have determined that each of them contains large deposits of water ice, which was probably deposited many years ago as pure snow and then covered by a mix of water ice and rock followed by additional layers of rock and dust. The deposits had previously been inferred using the MRO's instruments fitted with ground-penetrating radar capability, and researchers believe the water could potentially be utilized by robots astronauts in future missions. In addition to the eight individual deposits, the researches also deposited that a thin layer of water ice exists below perhaps a third of the surface of Mars, though this layer is deeper and thus less readily attainable.
